

• Title: Soil redox potential as a predictor of endobenthos 
  species composition in an intertidal zone

• Author: Richèl Bilderbeek, Community and Conservation Ecology, 
  University of Groningen, r.j.c.bilderbeek@rug.nl

• Running title: Redox potential versus species composition

• Keywords: relation soil redox potential endobenthos benthos 
  species composition intertidal mudflat

• Type of article: Letter

• Number of words in abstract: 107

• Number of words in main text: 1053

• Number of words in text boxes: 0

• Number of references: 6

• Number of figures: 2

• Number of tables: 3

• Correspondence address: Richèl Bilderbeek, COCON, P.O. Box 
  11103, 9700 CC Groningen, University of Groningen, +31 50 363 
  6133, r.j.c.bilderbeek@rug.nl




Soil redox potential as a predictor of endobenthos species 
composition in an intertidal zone

Richèl Bilderbeek

Abstract

Soil redox potential measurements can be done without much 
physical effort in a short amount of time, whereas measuring 
endobenthos species diversity involves more effort and time. This 
study explored if soil redox potential can be used as a sole 
predictor of the abundance of endobenthos. Both variables were 
measured at an intertidal zone at Schiermonnikoog at a transect 
from salt marsh to mudflat. Inundation was expected to be 
influential in species composition, and to correct for this, 
species abundances and redox values were obtained from two depths 
at each site. It was found that redox potential alone cannot be 
used as predictor of endobenthos composition.

  Introduction



Species composition is one of the first and most vital pieces of 
data a field-based ecological research needs to gather. Any way 
to reliably conclude the same information with less work will 
save researchers both time and resources. One piece of 
information that is easy to obtain is a soil its redox potential. 
Redox potential is not just a passive abiotic factor; it is a 
value of biological importance. Among others, redox potential can 
be a measure of oxygen in the soil, and it is known that plant 
roots can raise the oxygen level in the soil (and thus its redox 
potential) (Blossfeld et al. (2011)). This positive correlation, 
however, is not always correct, because at least one other study 
finds a negative correlation (Dong et al. (2014)). As far as I 
know, using redox potential as a predictor of bethos species 
being present or not, has not yet been investigated. 

As redox potential is positively correlated with soil oxygen 
concentration, and all animals need oxygen for respiration, I 
expect some benthos animals to respond to soil redox potential. 
The most likely candidates are animals that live in the soil and 
breathe through their skin, as these animals might choke from a 
too low oxygen concentration and will probably move to a habitat 
with a higher oxygen concentration instead. Additionally, it 
might be that microbenthos serving as prey aggregrates at a 
certain oxygen concentration, which might cause its predator to 
follow this distribution.



The hypothesis tested is if soil redox potential can be used as a 
sole predictor of endobenthos species abundance, when assuming 
species distribute themselves normally around a certain redox 
potential. This study makes a strong case that this hypothesis 
should be rejected.

  Material and methods



This study was carried out at the intertidal zone of 
Schiermonnikoog. In the Southwest of this island, a 2400 meter 
long transect was set up, from salt marsh to mudflat. The 
elevations of the transect range from 270 cm to -80 cm NAP. All 
measurements were done at September 9th and 10th. At those days, 
inundation times of the sample sites ranged from from 1-80% of a 
tidal period.



Soil samples of 20 cm deep were taken at different distances. The 
top 5 cm was separated. Both parts of the soil sample were scored 
for species. 



Redox values were measured by a potentiometer using 4 
platinum-tip electrodes and a solution of KCl as a reference. The 
electrodes were put in at three depths: 2, 5 and 10 cm, in this 
sequence. The potential read is the value that remained constant, 
when placing or changing the electrodes. The values read were 
transformed to use earth as a reference point, using the formula V=1.8847\cdot V_{measured}-53.201

.



In this study, the redox potential at 2 cm depth is coupled to 
the benthos species diversity at depth 0-5 cm, where the 
potential at 10 cm depth is coupled to the diversity of depth 
5-20 cm.



Of all collected species, only species with at least 3 
individuals at both depths were taken into account. The minimum 
value of 3 was chosen, because it is the minimum number to test 
for normality. The requirement for a species to be at two depths 
is to disrupt the effect of inundation, as there can be similar 
redox potentials for different inundation times. 



For each species, a Shapiro-Wilk normality test was used to 
determine if abundance is distributed normally around a certain 
redox potential. This test is chosen, as it has the best power 
for a given significance (Razali and Wah (2011)).



The script to analyze the data is written in R and can be 
downloaded at https://github.com/richelbilderbeek/EvoEcoResearchCourse2014
, or viewed in the appendix.

  Results

The redox potentials measured can be seen in figure [fig:RedoxPerDistance]
.

863 individuals of 18 different benthos species were collected at 
the site (see figure [table_species_count_at_depth]). Of these 
species, 8 species had at least 3 individuals at both depths. Out 
of these 8 species, only 4 could be used, as not all sites were 
measured for redox potential. From the 4 species left, only the 2 
species occurring at multiple redox potentials were analyzed. 
These two species were Hydrobia ulvae and Nereis diversicolor. 
Figure [fig:SpeciesAbundances] shows the abundance of both 
species at different redox potentials. A Shapiro-Wilk normality 
test shows that both species have a significant probability of 
not following a normal distribution (p_{Hydrobia}<0.001
, p_{Nereis}<0.05

, see table [tab:NormalityTest] for exact values).

  Discussion

This study makes a strong case that soil redox potential cannot 
be used to predict species abundances, for both Hydrobia ulvae 
and Nereis diversicolor. 

As Hydrobia ulvae is an epibenthic grazer (Newell (1965)), it 
seems rather obvious that is not influenced by the oxygen level 
of the soil underneath it. Less obvious is that individuals were 
found in benthos 5 cm below the surface. This finding appears not 
to be an experimental error, as Hydrobia ulvae is found in deeper 
soil samples at multiple distances. It might be that the Hydrobia 
ulvae found in the deeper soil were not individuals, but only the 
shells left.

Nereis diversicolor creates burrows in the mud and is a predator 
and scavanger (Witte and Wilde de (1979)). As it does not live in 
the soil itself, nor does it feed on something in the soil 
itself, it is not surprising that also this species is unaffected 
by soil redox potential.

Coupling a redox potential at a single depth to species 
abundances at a range of depths may have been too much of a 
simplification. Redox potential changes when probing at different 
depths in the soil, but whether this change is monotonous was 
unknown. After drawing the conclusions, the change of redox 
potential was analyzed for its orderedness. Because in the 
experiments also the redox potential at 5 cm deep was measured, 
it could be tested if redox potential changes monotonously for 
depths 2, 5 and 10 cm. It was found that this was the case in 10 
out of 13 locations (see table [tab:Orderedness]). Thus, in 3 out 
of 13 cases, the redox potential at intermediate depth was the 
heighest or lowest value measured at that location. There can be 
two explanations for this unexpected pattern: (1) the soil redox 
potential is a complex abiotic variable that does not follow a 
monotonic change, or (2) the noise in the redox measurement is 
higher than the change in 'true' redox potential between depths.

[LaTeX Command: bibtex]

  


<table_species_count_at_depth>Table 1: All 18 species and the 
number of individuals found per species per depth.






        Species name          Depth: 2 cm    Depth: 10 cm  
-----------------------------------------------------------
      Arenicola marina            12              1        
        Bathyporeia                2              0        
      Carcinus maenas              3              14       
     Cerastoderma edule            5              22       
     Crassostrea gigas             4              6        
        Eteone longa               0              5        
      Gammarus locusta             1              3        
    Hemigropsus takanoi            4              11       
  Heteromastus filliformis         1              13       
       Hydrobia ulvae             131            369       
     Lanice conchilega             2              31       
     Littorina littorea           11              51       
      Macoma balthica              0              31       
       Mytilus edulis              7              78       
    Nereis diversicolor           14              10       
       Nereis virens               3              0        
     Scoloplas armiger             1              16       
    Scrobicularia plana            1              0        


  


<tab:NormalityTest>Table 2: Shapiro-Wilk normality test of the 
species abundances on redox potential. n: number of individuals. 
p: chance the species abundances do not follow a normal 
distribution for a redox potential.






         Name             n         p        significance  
-----------------------------------------------------------
    Hydrobia ulvae       294    < 2.2e-16        ***       
  Nereis diversicolor     9      0.04965          *        


  


<tab:Orderedness>Table 3: the way the redox potentials are 
ordered when measuring a redox potential at 2, 5 and 10 cm in 
this order. LTH: low-to-high (the lowest redox potential was 
measured at 2cm deep, the heighest at 10 cm), HTL: high-to-low, 
UNO: unordered.






  Distance    Orderedness  
---------------------------
    220           LTH      
    250           UNO      
    300           UNO      
    350           LTH      
    400           LTH      
    500           LTH      
    1000          UNO      
    1150          LTH      
    1400          HTL      
    1600          HTL      
    1800          HTL      
    1970          HTL      
    2250          HTL      
    2300          HTL      
    2350          HTL      
    2400          HTL      


  


<Graphics file: /home/richel/GitHubs/EvoEcoResearchCourse2014/Figure_redox_per_distance.svg>

<fig:RedoxPerDistance>Figure 1: Redox potentials along the 
transect.

  


<Graphics file: /home/richel/GitHubs/EvoEcoResearchCourse2014/Figure_species_abundances.svg>

<fig:SpeciesAbundances>Figure 2: Number of individuals at the 
different redox potentials

  


# Manuscript, script to generate figures and tables for the 
Evolution & Ecology Research course 2014

# Copyright (C) 2014 Richel Bilderbeek

# 

# This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or 
modify

# it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as 
published by

# the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, 
or

# (at your option) any later version.

# 

# This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,

# but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of

# MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.See the

# GNU General Public License for more details.

# You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public 
License

# along with this program.If not, see 
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

#

# File can be downloaded from 
https://github.com/richelbilderbeek/EvoEcoResearchCourse2014

#

# Research question: Can I predict where species are from a redox 
potential?

# Experiment: 

# * Couple shallow (0-5 cm) benthos abundances with redox 
measurement of 2 cm

# * Couple deep (5-20 cm) benthos abundances with redox 
measurement of 10 cm

# Answer: 

# * No 



rm(list = ls())

setwd("~/GitHubs/EvoEcoResearchCourse2014")

library(reshape2)

library(testit)



# Create benthos data as such:

#  dist_m depth_cm species_name

#  2350   2        Bathyporeia_spec.

#  2400   10       Nereis_diversicolor

# Removes species at unknown depths

CreateDataBenthos <- function()

{

	data_benthos <- 
read.table("benthos_species_diversity.csv",header=TRUE,sep=",")

	#Remove useless columns

	data_benthos <-data_benthos[ 
c("dist_m","soil_layer","species_name") ]

	# Only keep rows with 'D' or 'S' (for deep and shallow/top part 
of the core)

	data_benthos<-data_benthos[data_benthos$soil_layer != "U" & 
data_benthos$soil_layer != "?", ]

	# Drop the unneeded levels 

	data_benthos$soil_layer <- droplevels(data_benthos$soil_layer)

	#Of data_benthod, change the column 'soil_layer' to 'depth_cm': 

	# if soil_layer == "S" -> depth_cm = 2

	# if soil_layer == "D" -> depth_cm = 10

	names(data_benthos) <- c("dist_m","depth_cm","species_name")

	data_benthos$depth_cm <- as.factor(data_benthos$depth_cm)

	# Rename the levels

	levels(data_benthos$depth_cm) <- c(2,10)

	data_benthos

}



# Count the species occurring at two depths

# species_name      2  10

# Arenicola_marina  12  1

# Bathyporeia_spec. 2   0

GetSpeciesCountAtDepths <- function()

{

	species_to_depth <- dcast(

		CreateDataBenthos(),

		species_name ~ depth_cm,

		value.var = "species_name",

		fill = 0, 

		fun.aggregate=length # fun.aggregate may also be mean

	) 

	species_to_depth

}



# Obtain the species names occuring at least thrice in both of 
the two depths in the soil

# Will be this:

# [1] Carcinus_maenas     Cerastoderma_edule  Crassostrea_gigas   
Hemigropsus_takanoi Hydrobia_ulvae     

# [6] Littorina_littorea  Mytilus_edulis      Nereis_diversicolor

# 8 Levels: Carcinus_maenas Cerastoderma_edule Crassostrea_gigas 
Hemigropsus_takanoi ... Nereis_diversicolor

GetSelectedSpecies <- function()

{

	species_to_depth <- GetSpeciesCountAtDepths()

	selected_species_to_depth <- subset(species_to_depth,

		  species_to_depth$"2" > 2 & species_to_depth$"10" > 2)

	selected_species_to_depth <- 
droplevels(selected_species_to_depth)

	# Collect all species' names

	species_list <- levels(selected_species_to_depth$species_name)

	selected_species <- selected_species_to_depth$species_name

	selected_species <- droplevels(selected_species)

	selected_species

}



GetDataBenthosSelected <- function()

{

  data_benthos <- CreateDataBenthos()

	selected_species <- GetSelectedSpecies()

  #data_benthos_selected <- data_benthos[ 
data_benthos$species_name %in% selected_species,]

	data_benthos_selected <- data_benthos[ data_benthos$species_name 
%in% GetSelectedSpecies(),]

  data_benthos_selected

}



# Prepare the redox data

# dist_m depth_cm replicate redox_calib

# 220    2        1         304.89200

# 220    2        2         302.63036

CreateDataRedox <- function()

{	

	data_redox <- read.table("Redox.csv",header=TRUE,sep="\t")

	data_redox <- subset(data_redox,depth_cm != 5)

	data_redox

	#Remove the replicate column

	data_redox <- data_redox[c("dist_m","depth_cm","redox_calib") ]

	# Take the average redox values, so that every distance and 
depth has a single redox value

	data_redox <- 
aggregate(data_redox,list(data_redox$depth_cm,data_redox$dist_m),mean)

	data_redox <- data_redox[c("dist_m","depth_cm","redox_calib") ]

	data_redox

}



CreateDataRedoxAll <- function()

{	

	data_redox <- read.table("Redox.csv",header=TRUE,sep="\t")

	#Remove the replicate column

	data_redox <- data_redox[c("dist_m","depth_cm","redox_calib") ]

	# Take the average redox values, so that every distance and 
depth has a single redox value

	data_redox <- 
aggregate(data_redox,list(data_redox$depth_cm,data_redox$dist_m),mean)

	data_redox <- data_redox[c("dist_m","depth_cm","redox_calib") ]

	data_redox

}



GetRedoxPerDistance <- function()

{	

	data_redox <- read.table("Redox.csv",header=TRUE,sep="\t")

	#Remove the replicate column

	data_redox <- data_redox[c("dist_m","depth_cm","redox_calib") ]

	# Take the average redox values, so that every distance and 
depth has a single redox value

	data_redox <- 
aggregate(data_redox,list(data_redox$depth_cm,data_redox$dist_m),mean)

	data_redox <- data_redox[c("dist_m","depth_cm","redox_calib") ]

	data_redox

}



# Get the 32 redox values used in this study

# [1] -987.68238 -857.44961 -834.07933 -811.22734 -750.16306 
-742.48291 -699.70022 -616.30224 -577.85436 -528.05116

# ...

# [31]  350.83156  370.14974

GetRedoxValues <- function()

{

	redox_values <- subset(CreateDataRedox(),select="redox_calib")

	redox_values <- unique(redox_values)

	redox_values <- sort(redox_values$redox_calib)

	redox_values

}



# Obtain the distances of all redox sites

#  [1]  220  250  300  350  400  500 1000 1150 1400 1600 1800 
1970 2250 2300 2350 2400

GetDistances <- function()

{

	distances <- subset(CreateDataRedox(),select="dist_m")

	distances <- unique(distances)

	distances <- sort(distances$dist_m)

	distances

}



# Get all species per redox potential

# redox_calib   species_name

# -78.26751 Hydrobia_ulvae

# -78.26751 Hydrobia_ulvae

GetDataCombined <- function()

{

	data_combined <- 
merge(CreateDataRedox(),GetDataBenthosSelected(),by=c("dist_m","depth_cm"),all=FALSE)

	data_combined$species_name <- 
droplevels(data_combined$species_name)

	data_combined <- data_combined[ c("redox_calib","species_name") 
]

	data_combined

}



# Get the redox potentials of Hydrobia

# [1] -78.26751 -78.26751 -78.26751 -78.26751 -78.26751 -78.26751 
-78.26751 -78.26751 -78.26751 -78.26751

GetRedoxesHydrobia <- function()

{

  redoxes_hydrobia <- subset(GetDataCombined(),species_name == 
"Hydrobia_ulvae")

  redoxes_hydrobia <- 
subset(redoxes_hydrobia,select=c("redox_calib"))

  redoxes_hydrobia

}



GetRedoxesNereis <- function()

{

  redoxes_nereis <- subset(GetDataCombined(),species_name == 
"Nereis_diversicolor")

  redoxes_nereis <- 
subset(redoxes_nereis,select=c("redox_calib"))

	redoxes_nereis

}



TallySpeciesPerRedox <- function()

{

	redox_to_species <- dcast(

		GetDataCombined(),

		redox_calib ~ species_name,

		value.var = "species_name",

		fill = 0, 

		fun.aggregate=length # fun.aggregate may also be mean

	) 

	redox_calib <- redox_to_species$redox_calib

	# Note that not all species are present anymore that often. This 
is due to that not all distances are redoxed

	redox_to_species

}



TallySelectedSpeciesPerRedox <- function()

{

	redox_to_species <- TallySpeciesPerRedox()

	redox_to_species <- redox_to_species[, colSums(redox_to_species) 
> 6]

	redox_to_species <- 
cbind(TallySpeciesPerRedox(),redox_to_species)

	redox_to_species <- redox_to_species[, 
c("redox_calib","Hydrobia_ulvae","Nereis_diversicolor")]

	redox_to_species

}



# Can the redox potentials at a certain distane be assumed to be 
linear at a certain depth?

CalcOrderednessPerDistance <- function()

{

	orderedness_per_distance <- data.frame(dist_m = numeric(),order 
= factor())

	for (i in GetDistances())

	{

    data <- subset(CreateDataRedoxAll(),dist_m == i)

    low <- subset(data,depth_cm == 2)$redox_calib

    mid <- subset(data,depth_cm == 5)$redox_calib

    high <- subset(data,depth_cm == 10)$redox_calib

	  if (low < mid && mid < high) 

	  { 

	  	orderedness_per_distance <- 
rbind(orderedness_per_distance,data.frame(dist_m = i,order = 
"LTH"))

	  } else if(low > mid && mid > high) 

	  { 

	  	orderedness_per_distance <- 
rbind(orderedness_per_distance,data.frame(dist_m = i, order = 
"HTL"))

	  } else  { 

	  	orderedness_per_distance <- 
rbind(orderedness_per_distance,data.frame(dist_m = i, order = 
"UNO"))

	  }

	}

	orderedness_per_distance

}



# Generate figure for species abundances for the range of redox 
potentials

#   in two vertically aligned plots

CreateFigureSpeciesAbundancesSeperate <- function()

{

	svg(filename="Figure_species_abundances_seperate.svg")

	par(mfrow=c(2,1))

	plot(

		Hydrobia_ulvae ~ redox_calib, 

		data = TallySpeciesPerRedox(), 

		t = "b", 

		pch = 19, 

		col = "black",

		#main = "Hydrobia ulvae abundance",

		xlab = "Redox potential (mV)",

		ylab = "# Hydrobia ulvae"

	)

	plot(

		Nereis_diversicolor ~ redox_calib, 

		data = TallySpeciesPerRedox(), 

		t = "b", 

		pch = 19, 

		col = "black",

		#main = "Nereis diversicolor abundance",

		xlab = "Redox potential (mV)",

		ylab = "# Nereis Diversicolor",

		ylim = c(0,4)

	)

	par(mfrow=c(1,1))

	dev.off()

}



# Generate figure for species abundances for the range of redox 
potentials

#   in the same plot

CreateFigureSpeciesAbundances <- function()

{

	svg(filename="Figure_species_abundances.svg")

	par(mar = c(5, 4, 4, 4) + 0.3)  # Leave space for z axis

	par(new = FALSE) 

	plot(Hydrobia_ulvae ~ redox_calib, data = 
TallySpeciesPerRedox(), pch=19, axes=FALSE, xlab="Redox potential 
(mV)", ylab="", 

	   type="b",col="blue"

		#main="Species abundandances\nfor different redox potentials"

	)

	axis(1, col="black",las=1) #'las=1' align labels horizontally

	axis(2, col="blue",las=1) #'las=1' align labels horizontally

	mtext("# Hydrobia",side=2,line=2.5,col="blue")

	box()

	par(new = TRUE) # Prevents R from clearing the area 

	plot(

		Nereis_diversicolor ~ redox_calib, axes = FALSE, bty = "n", 
xlab = "", ylab = "", data = TallySpeciesPerRedox(),

		type="b",

		col = "red",

		yaxt="n", 

		pch = 19

	)

	axis(

		side=4, 

		at=seq(0,3,1), #Otherwise, 0.5 would be shown as a tick mark

		col="red",

		las=1 #Align labels horizontally

	)

	mtext("# Nereis", side=4, line=3,col="red")

	legend("topright",

	  inset=0.05,title = "Species name", c("Hydrobia ulvae", "Nereis 
diversicolor"),horiz=TRUE,

	  fill=c("blue","red"), 

		cex = 0.75

	)

	dev.off()

}



# Redox potentials along the transect for the two depths

CreateFigureRedoxPerDistance <- function()

{

	svg(filename="Figure_redox_per_distance.svg")

	dist_to_redox <- subset(CreateDataRedox(), 
CreateDataRedox()$dist_m %in% GetDistances())

	y_min <- min(dist_to_redox$redox_calib) - 100

	y_max <- max(dist_to_redox$redox_calib) + 1000

	y_text <- y_max - 200

	plot(

		dist_to_redox$redox_calib ~ dist_to_redox$dist_m,

		col = as.factor(dist_to_redox$depth_cm), 

		pch = 19,

		#main="Redox potentials along the transect\nfor the two 
depths",

		xlab="Distance along transect (m)",

		ylab="Redox potential (mV)",

		ylim=c(y_min,y_max)

	)

	segments(1125,y_min,1125,y_max,col="black",lty=3)

	segments(1900,y_min,1900,y_max,col="black",lty=3)

	segments(2225,y_min,2225,y_max,col="black",lty=3)

	text((1125 + 150) / 2,y_text,"Salt\nmarsh")

	text((1900 + 1125) / 2,y_text,"Mud\nflat")

	text((2225 + 1900) / 2,y_text,"Mussel\nbed")

	text(-50 + ((2600 + 2225) / 2),y_text,"Mud\nflat")

	legend("bottomleft",

	  inset=0.05,title = "Sampling depth", c("2 cm", "10 
cm"),horiz=TRUE,

	  fill=c(1,2,3), cex = 1.0

	)

	rm(dist_to_redox)

	rm(y_min)

	rm(y_max)

	rm(y_text)

	dev.off()

}



assert("CreateDataBenthos: 863 individuals were scored at known 
depths",length(CreateDataBenthos()$dist_m) == 863)

assert("GetSpeciesCountAtDepths: All 863 individuals must be 
seperated correctly at their 
depths",length(CreateDataBenthos()$dist_m) == 
sum(GetSpeciesCountAtDepths()$"2") + 
sum(GetSpeciesCountAtDepths()$"10"))

assert("GetSpeciesCountAtDepths: 20 species were scored at all 
depths",length(GetSpeciesCountAtDepths()$species_name) == 20)

assert("GetSelectedSpecies: 8 species were found at both depths, 
at each depth occurring at least 
thrice",length(GetSelectedSpecies()) == 8)

assert("GetDataBenthosSelected: 740 individuals of the 8 selected 
species were scored at known 
depths",length(GetDataBenthosSelected()$species_name) == 740)

assert("CreateDataRedox must only consider depths of 2 and 10 
cm",length(subset(CreateDataRedox(),depth_cm != 2 & depth_cm != 
10)$depth_cm) == 0)

assert("GetRedoxValues: 32 redox potentials are 
investigated",length(GetRedoxValues()) == 32)

assert("GetDistances: 16 distances are 
investigated",length(GetDistances()) == 16)

assert("GetDataCombined: needs to be 1176 
Hydrobia",length(subset(GetDataCombined(),species_name == 
"Hydrobia_ulvae")$species_name) == 294)

assert("GetDataCombined: needs to be 36 Nereis 
diversicolor",length(subset(GetDataCombined(),species_name == 
"Nereis_diversicolor")$species_name) == 9)

assert("GetRedoxesHydrobia: must be 294 
values",length(GetRedoxesHydrobia()$redox_calib) == 294)

assert("GetRedoxesNereis: must be 9 
values",length(GetRedoxesNereis()$redox_calib) == 9)

assert("TallySpeciesPerRedox: must be 9 columns (redoxes and each 
species its frequency",length(TallySpeciesPerRedox()) == 9)

assert("TallySelectedSpeciesPerRedox: must be 3 columns (redoxes, 
Hydrobia and Nereis",length(TallySelectedSpeciesPerRedox()) == 3)

assert("CalcOrderednessPerDistance: must have 16 
distances",length(CalcOrderednessPerDistance()$dist_m) == 16)




write.csv(GetSpeciesCountAtDepths(),file="table_species_count_at_depth.csv")

write.csv(GetSelectedSpecies(),file="table_selected_species.csv")


write.csv(CalcOrderednessPerDistance(),file="table_orderedness_per_distance.csv")


write.csv(TallySpeciesPerRedox(),file="table_redox_to_species.csv")


write.csv(TallySelectedSpeciesPerRedox(),file="table_redox_to_selected_species.csv")



# Do statistics per species

shapiro.test(GetRedoxesHydrobia()$redox_calib)

# Shapiro-Wilk normality test

# 

# data:  redoxes_hydrobia$redox_calib

# W = 0.7567, p-value < 2.2e-16



shapiro.test(GetRedoxesNereis()$redox_calib)

# Shapiro-Wilk normality test

# 

# data:  redoxes_nereis$redox_calib

# W = 0.8341, p-value = 0.04965



# Creates Figure_species_abundances_seperate.svg 

CreateFigureSpeciesAbundancesSeperate()



# Create Figure_species_abundances.svg 

CreateFigureSpeciesAbundances()



# Create Figure_redox_per_distance.svg

CreateFigureRedoxPerDistance()

